fallibilism
fallabilism is the start that you could
be wrong
and the reason for that is that a
falliblist knows there is something to
be wrong about
and when we say wrong about we mean
there is something to be objectively
wrong about there really is nothing more
to it
but the consequences of this are vast
and far-reaching and worth unpacking
all of what i have just said about
fallibalism makes fallibilism actually
the strict opposite to relativism
relativism after all claims that there
is nothing to be wrong about in any
objective sense
there is no being objectively right or
wrong people just make claims relative
to who they are where they are or when
they are infalliblism is the opposite
simultaneously to forms of dogmatism
which say one cannot possibly be wrong
because one is in possession of the
dogma the final truth on some matter
if one takes justificationism seriously
if one is actually justified by some
means it could be the evidence or it
could be bayesian inferring then one has
the stance that they are not wrong they
are justified in their truth only
falliblism correctly walks the line
between its two opposites relativism and
dogmatism relativism and dogmatism are
actually very closely aligned they both
agree that being wrong is something they
cannot objectively be in the state of
being the dogmatist insists they cannot
be wrong and the relativist says they
cannot be wrong the dogmatist just says
that anyone who disagrees with them is
certainly wrong and the relativist says
that everyone else is just as wrong as
they are all of this arises when we
analyze it philosophically out of the
era that is justificationism
what is this justificationism well it's
the idea that you should try to justify
as true your beliefs in some way and
when you have then you have knowledge or
probably have knowledge or some such
and because they the erstwhile
justificationists
eventually find that this project always
fails they will conclude that trying to
justify as actually true some claim or
other is a fool's errand and thus
conclude the pursuit of knowledge itself
is a pointless exercise by the means of
justification
they recognize the error but usually not
the solution the error they recognize
correctly is that justificationism is
false we cannot justify our knowledge as
true in science because no amount of
evidence ever shows something might not
be shown false no matter how confident
or close you think you might be to
getting to absolute certainty or in
mathematics either because you never can
be sure or rather you can never prove as
true your axioms you never know how you
might be laboring under a misconception
and so on because all of this in
whatever domain from science through to
morality and mathematics and more the
justificationist concludes wrongly that
knowledge cannot therefore be possible
so many times they the people who think
knowledge is about justifying things is
true
fall into relativism because they think
it's the only option left so they
conclude we must all have our own
morality for example because it's all
culturally contingent it depends on the
tribe in which we were raised or we all
have our own models in science none of
these scientific models ever actually
track reality
but they are just convenient tools that
work in some narrow domain but they can
never possibly tell us anything true or
false about reality reality on this view
might not even exist after all there is
no fact of the matter just subjective
understanding and that is not anchored
to anything real after all there might
not be anything real there is nothing
perhaps to even be wrong about so all of
that relativism is just one route the
other route is just to embrace
justifying as true our beliefs even
though we know it has failed so we end
up in authoritarian dogmatism we then
must hear about settled science or the
perfect inerrant word of god or we must
believe as true the evidence as though
evidence is itself a final theory that
never requires any interpretation
evidence is prima facie facts it does
not depend upon theory for its
interpretation on this view dogmatism
may be just as prevalent today as
relativism and that is not a mistake
because as i said they are in truth very
closely aligned in denying the
possibility of being in an objective
state of error so it is only fallibilism
that is the best and correct solution to
recognizing that we cannot justify as
true our beliefs or even justify them as
probably true none of that is needed
because our good explanations of the
world are good by measuring them against
their competitors rarely are there any
competitors but when there are
competitors only the fallibles can
properly understand how it is that they
those theories can be objectively wrong
and that techniques like experimentation
can reveal an objective error in all of
them except for the one that's left
standing the one that goes unrefuted by
its encounter with the reality that
really exists
fallibilism says we cannot find the
final truth but we can be wrong and why
because there is something to be wrong
about there always is
this stands in utter contrast to
relativism and it stands an utter
contrast to dogmatism that says we know
we can have the final truth in hand both
relativism and dogmatism are morally
dangerous alternatives the relativists
because they are impotent in the face of
evil the dogmatist because they will
mistakenly fight to the death to defend
an evil they think is good where other
philosophies like empiricism have
attempted to walk a different path to
pure dogmatism or deference to authority
and relativism or even its more ancient
cousin known as radical skepticism which
also denied the possibility of knowledge
all of these get it wrong because they
think what we should desire is a search
for truth that can somehow end in the
truth but it cannot we can search for
the truth and we can fail to find it
objectively we do search for the truth
we search for objectively good solutions
to our problems and we do make progress
by correcting errors
progress means objective improvement and
objective improvement means we have
managed to find out something more about
reality something that brings us closer
to the truth about what that reality is
but reality is infinitely complex so it
is impossible to have a finally true
statement about it
our claims about it amount to statements
not propositions propositions being the
elemental claims about reality that have
a final truth value
what we have in our explanations of the
world are instead statements we make
statements about reality a statement is
an approximation to a proposition
propositions are represented by symbols
in for example formal logic and pure
mathematics we assume they are true in
order to find proofs of theorems but
it's all assumptions where we begin are
the axioms and axioms are sometimes
simply called assumptions in formal
logic for good reason the theories of
science and history and beauty and so on
amount to statements about reality they
are claims about what is really there
and they can only ever be approximations
to the final ontology again because
reality itself is infinitely complex and
in all directions an atom is infinitely
complex a galaxy is infinitely complex a
person is infinitely complex we will
never come to an end of learning about
these things we will go on describing
and explaining each of these things
approximately but with increasing
fidelity over time using our tools of
reason to detect and correct errors
since the enlightenment the key feature
that allows us uniquely to achieve all
of this is our reason but we can be even
more precise than merely this the key
feature of our reason that allows for
progress is a tradition of criticism
which we can embrace as individuals and
as whole civilizations
this critical approach is about
recognizing that what we know is not the
final word it has flaws we could be
wrong about it so to make progress we
criticize it and through this criticism
we can identify errors and then with
some effort we can correct them by
creating new explanations fallablism it
is the opposite to relativism
fallibilism says you can be wrong about
something and in embracing the fact that
you can be wrong about something you
realize that you have before you an
opportunity for progress this is the
only known way knowledge can be created
the identification and correction of
errors the possibility of error is only
contained properly within a fallibilist
framework it is thus the only robust way
of making knowledge all other options
are fragile to falling into the trap of
thinking error is not possible here
either because so-called error making is
merely relative to who you are or making
an error is simply not possible given
one already has the truth or some
calculation or some book or authority or
some piece of evidence testifying to the
fact that error simply is not possible
here
falliblism it's not relativism it's not
dogmatism it is merely the recognition
that there is something out there to be
wrong about and you personally could be
wrong about it and so could everyone
else but with an effort we can identify
what we are wrong about correct it and
so make some objective progress
of course i could be wrong about this or
some of this or all of this but only
because there is something to be
objectively wrong about
[Music]
you